---
title: Lexical Analysis
author: Sungbin Jo (2021-13630)
---

## Implementation notes

### New tokens

Nothing to see here, just boring token additions.

```c++
enum EToken {
  tNumber = 0,  ///< a number
  tIdent,       ///< an identifier
  tPlusMinus,   ///< '+' or '-'
  tMulDiv,      ///< '*' or '/'
  tAnd,         ///< '&&'
  tOr,          ///< '||'
  tNot,         ///< '!'
  tRelOp,       ///< relational operator
  tAssign,      ///< assignment operator
  tColon,       ///< a colon
  tSemicolon,   ///< a semicolon
  tDot,         ///< a dot
  tComma,       ///< a comma
  tLParen,      ///< a left parenthesis
  tRParen,      ///< a right parenthesis
  tLBrack,      ///< a left bracket
  tRBrack,      ///< a right bracket

  tBoolean,  ///< 'boolean'
  tChar,     ///< 'char'
  tInteger,  ///< 'integer'
  tLongInt,  ///< 'longint'

  tConst,      ///< 'const'
  tVar,        ///< 'var'
  tExtern,     ///< 'extern'
  tProcedure,  ///< 'procedure'
  tFunction,   ///< 'function'
  tModule,     ///< 'module'
  tBegin,      ///< 'begin'
  tEnd,        ///< 'end'

  tIf,      ///< 'if'
  tThen,    ///< 'then'
  tElse,    ///< 'else'
  tWhile,   ///< 'while'
  tDo,      ///< 'do'
  tReturn,  ///< 'return'

  tBoolConst,    ///< boolean constant
  tCharConst,    ///< character constant
  tStringConst,  ///< string constant

  tEOF,             ///< end of file
  tIOError,         ///< I/O error
  tInvCharConst,    ///< invalid char constant
  tInvStringConst,  ///< invalid string constant
  tUndefined,       ///< undefined
}
```

### Handling comments

The initial implementation was to call and return `Scan()` in the big
switch-case statement, but it felt brittle that `Scan()` now has to be
re-entrant and to be careful not to introduce any cleanup for
`Scan()`. The current implementation now skips comments before the
switch while reading the first character.

### Handling invalid char and string literals

To avoid cascading errors in the case of invalid string literals, the
scanner tries to find a known valid recovery point. The language spec
doesn't allow multiline string literals, so the scanner can just skip
characters until it finds a closing quote or a newline.

Avoiding cascading errors in multichar char literals are harder
because the scanner can't determine if it's in a middle of a multichar
char literal or if it's just missing a closing quote and the next
character is a valid token. The current implementation just gives up
on the first error, tries to consume a closing quote and assume that
it's now normal state again. This unfortunately causes spurious errors
when the code contains a multichar char literal.

## Notable differences from the provided code

### Addition of `TryChar()`

The simple helper function `TryChar()` was introduced for cases when
the return value of `GetChar()` is not needed after testing
`PeekChar()` for a specific character. This is usually only the case
when handling token delimiters that don't get included in the value.

### Return values of `GetChar()` and `PeekChar()`

The functions `GetChar()` and `PeekChar()` are used throughout the
scanner without checking whether `_in->good()` or not. Because the
standard doesn't provide any guarantees on the value of `eof` except
that it is negative (though most platforms set them to -1),
theoretically comparing the returned `unsigned char` value with any
character can succeed even when the stream is returning an `eof`
value.

To avoid confusion between real characters and `eof`, `GetChar()` and
`PeekChar()` are modified to return an `int`. The return value should
only be assigned to `unsigned char` if `_in->good()` is guaranteed.

### Rename of `t*Brak` tokens

The provided code handles parens with `t*Brak` tokens, while the
current implementation handles them with `t*Paren` tokens. To avoid
bugs while merging provided code in the future, the bracket tokens
were deliberately named differently to cause compile errors.

## Random notes to future self

### Avoiding infinite loops on `eof` or I/O errors

If the while loop condition is negative (e.g. consume until
`PeekChar()` is not one of these characters), always check
`_in->good()` in the condition as well to avoid infinite loops.

### Testing regressions

Committing the output of test cases makes detecting whether some code
change resulted in a regression or not easier. This should probably go
into a top-level Makefile and a git commit hook.

```shell
for tf in test/scanner/test*.mod; do
    snuplc/test_scanner "$tf" > currrent/scanner/"$(basename "${tf%.mod}.stdout")";
done
```
