---
title: Intermediate Code Generation
author: Sungbin Jo (2021-13630), Kijun Shin (2021-15391)
---

## SwiftSnuPL IR implementation notes

Due to time constraints, we have implemented the IR only on the Swift
port of the compiler.

The Swift `Generator` converts a parsed module with resolver
information to the IR, which is basically two dictionaries; a
symbol-to-instructions mapping that represents the TEXT section, and a
symbol-to-strings mapping that represents the DATA section.

Honestly the IR is almost the same with the provided CppSnuPL with the
biggest differences being the names and how the code is being shared.
Most notable differences are from how we represent operands and
memory-related instructions.

`Operand` represents 64-bit scalar values that can either be a
constant, a register value, or a value on the stack; pointer
operations like array accessing and assignment are handled by
memory-related instructions directly. This is less of a design
decision, but more of something was forced due to time constraints; we
wanted a separate `Address` type that explicitly represents memory
addresses. Unfortuately, we did not have the time to design it, and
thankfully the SnuPL language is light in pointers; two specialized
instructions for loading and storing data from the memory was enough
to produce an IR.

Another point that stems from this difference is that the store, load
instructions do not have memory access size in the instruction; we are
planning for the memory layout of the array to have its size of the
item at the head, so that the runtime can dynamically check the item
size and invoke the appropriate instruction. We are planning to
implement this in the assembly backend, but we might re-add the memory
access size if we decide to not implement this.

The function call instruction also contains argument operands, which
is also different from CppSnuPL where there is a separate instruction
for passing arguments; this is so that the assembly backend doesn’t
need to care about the registers being overwritten while passing
arguments.

All-in-all, there isn’t really a lot to explain on the Swift IR
implementation; most ideas are a straightforward port of the CppSnuPL
TAC, optimized for implementation speed. A simple overview of each
instructions are below; consult the code on the specific details on
how they are implemented.

```swift
enum Operand {
    case constant(Int64) // a constant with the value
    case temporary(name: String) // a location for temporary scratch values
    case string(name: String) // a constant with the address of a string literal
    case symbol(Resolver.Symbol) // a location of the variable with the symbol
}

enum Instruction {
    case move(destination: Operand, source: Operand)
    case unary(op: UnaryOp, destination: Operand, source: Operand)
    case binary(op: BinaryOp, destination: Operand, source1: Operand, source2: Operand)
    case parameter(destination: Operand, index: Int)  // always 64-bit

    case jump(destination: String)
    case branch(destination: String, source1: Operand, source2: Operand)  // branch if equal
    case call(destination: Operand?, symbol: Resolver.Symbol, arguments: [Operand])
    case `return`(value: Operand?)

    case load(destination: Operand, symbol: Resolver.Symbol, indices: [Operand])
    case store(symbol: Resolver.Symbol, indices: [Operand], source: Operand)

    case label(name: String)
}
```
